Jacqui continues with the session.
Now, let us look at some networking basics
such as switching and routing.
In this section,
we will focus
on general networking concepts
such as network interfaces,
gateways, and routes.
We have two computers,
A and B,
laptops, desktops,
VMs on the cloud, wherever.
How does system A reach B?
We connect them to a switch
and the switch creates a network
containing the two systems.
To connect them to a switch,
we need an interface on each host,
physical or virtual, depending on the host.
To see the interfaces for the host,
we use the IP link command.
In this case,
we look at the interface named eth0
that we will be using to connect to the switch.
Let's assume it's a network with the address
192.168.1.0,
we then assign the systems
with IP addresses on the same network.
For this, we use the command ip addr.
Once the links are up
and the IP addresses are assigned,
the computers can now communicate
with each other through the switch.
The switch can only enable communication
within a network.
This means it can receive packets
from a host on the network
and deliver it to other systems
within the same network.
Say we have another network
containing systems C and D
at address 192.168.2.0,
the systems have IP address 192.168.2.10
and 2.11 respectively.
How does the system in one network
reach a system in the other?
How does system B
with the IP 1.11
reach system C
with the IP 2.10
on the other network?
That's where a router comes in.
A router helps
connect two networks together.
It is an intelligent device.
Think of it as another server
with many network ports.
Since it connects
to the two separate networks,
it gets two IPs assigned,
one on each network.
In the first network,
we assign it an IP address 1.1
and in the second one,
we assign it an IP address 2.1.
Now we have a router
connected to the two networks
that can enable communication between them.
When system B tries
to send a packet to system C,
how does it know where the router is
on the network to send the packet through?
The router is just another device
on the network.
There could be many other such devices.
That's where we configure the systems
with a gateway or a route.
If the network was a room,
the gateway is a door to the outside world,
to other networks or to the internet.
The systems need to know
where the door is to go through that.
To see the existing routing configuration
on a system,
run the route command.
It displays the kernel's routing table.
Within that,
as you can see,
there are no routing configurations
as of now.
In this condition,
your system B
will not be able to reach system C.
It can only reach other systems
within the same network
in the range 192.168.1.0.
In Linux,
to configure a gateway on system B
to reach the systems on network 2.0,
run the ip route add command
and specify that you can reach the 2.0 network
through the door or gateway
at 1.1.
Rerunning the route command
shows that we have a route added to reach
the 2.0 series network through the router.
Now remember,
this has to be configured on all systems.
For example, if the system C
is to send a packet to system B,
then you need to add a route
on system C's routing table
to access network 1.0
through the router
configured with the IP address 2.1.
Suppose these systems
need access to the internet,
say they need access to Google
at 172.217.194.0 network on the internet,
you connect the router to the internet.
Then add a new route in your routing table
to route all traffic
to the network 172.217.194 through your router.
There are so many different sites
on different networks on the internet.
Instead of adding a routing table entry
with the same routers IP address
for each of those networks,
you can simply say, for any network
that you don't know a route to,
use this router as the default gateway.
This way, any request to any network
outside of your existing network
goes to this particular router.
In a simple setup like this,
all you need is a single routing table entry
with the default gateway
set to the routers IP address.
Remember, instead of the word default,
you could also say 0.0.0.0,
it means any IP destination.
Both of these lines mean the same thing.
A 0.0.0.0 entry in the gateway field
indicates that you don't need a gateway.
For example, in this case,
for system C to access any device
in the 2.0 network,
it doesn't need a gateway
because it is its own network,
but say you have multiple routers
in your network,
one for the intranet
and another for internal private networks,
then you will need to have
two separate entries for each network.
One entry for the internal private network
and another default gateway
for all other networks,
including public networks.
If you are having issues
reaching the internet from your systems,
this routing table,
and the default gateway configuration
is a good place to look at.
Let's take away some key commands
from this session.
These will be handy
in our troubleshooting session.
IP link
is to list and modify interfaces on the host,
ip addr command
is to see the IP addresses
assigned to those interfaces.
ip addr add command
is used to set IP addresses on the interfaces.
Now remember,
changes made using these commands
are only valid till a system restart.
If you want to persist these changes,
you must set them
in the /etc/network/interfaces file.
IP route
or simply the route command
is used to view the routing table
and ip route add command
is used to add entries into the routing table.